Para this for para can also mean in order to.
In order to.
So in a sentence for example
We have spoken in order to resolve it.
Now in English we could just say we have spoken to resolve it.
No, we don't need to say in order to.
But whenever we have this to meaning in order to, we want to translate this as para in Spanish
So let's make this sentence.
First bit is we have spoken.
We have spoken
Hemos hablado.
To resolve it.
In order to resolve it.
Now to resolve is resolver.
The same word, resolver.
So we have spoken in order to resolve it.
Hemos hablado para resolverlo.
Good.
So whilst the two of to resolve resolver would fit nicely here, I mean if we were to translate directly from English, we have spoken
to resolve it.
It doesn't work in Spanish.
Whenever this to means in order to, we must put that para.
Hemos hablado para resolverlo.
You could say we have spoken in order to try to resolve it.
What was to try related to intention?
Intentar.
Good.
We have spoken in order to try to resolve it.
Hemos hablado para intentar resolvar resolver
Good.
Hemos hablado para intentar resolverlo.
So only when the two
implies in order to we want to put para the two forms of the verb in Spanish is not enough to include that meaning we must put para
So for example, if you want to say I'm here to see you, does it mean I'm here in order to see you?
Yes.
Good.
So I am here to see you informally.
Estoy aquí para verte.
Good.
This is also something we could learn or interiorize through the negative language transfer that some Spanish speakers make when they speak English.
For example, you might hear a Spanish speaker say
I am here for see you or for seeing you.
You might hear Spanish speaker, especially with basic English, making this mistake.
Now once you heard that a few times, you would say, oh
Maybe this is how you say it in Spanish.
So we don't want to forget this opportunity, the opportunity to learn from the negative language transfer, the mistakes.
that Spanish speakers make in English which originate from Spanish.
Once you hear the same mistake a few times, you can assume it probably comes from Spanish.
I have called you in order to speak about it.
So the first bit is I have called you, I have phoned, I have called informally
Eh Yamado.
Ah sorry.
In order to speak about it
Para hablar?
No.
Good.
We don't use about.
No, good.
Te è llamado para hablarlo.
So if we take the sentence in English I have called you to speak about it and we translate it directly, then we will say te e yamado hablarlo.
But when that too means in order to we must put this para
De llamado para hablarlo.
I have called you in order to speak about it.
Good.
What was to be for states?
And we said that we can use this to express when we are doing something right now.
We can say instead of I eat
I am eating using this structure with estar and then the ing form of the verb.
Do you remember how you would get the ing form of comer, for example, of er or ear verbs?
Comiendo.
Comienzo.
Good.
Comiendo.
So we add on yendo for our ear verbs.
And for our verbs we add on
Good.
So how would you say I am eating?
Stoy comiendo.
And this means uh right now, no?
I am speaking.
Estoy hablando.
I am explaining it.
To explain, we would go from explanation, but explanation is an exception.
It's not explanacion in Spanish, as we might hope.
explicación and we see we even have that que sound in explain explicación.
We have it in English as well, in inexplicable, for example, we say in English inexplicable in Spanish.
So we can see where that sounds coming from.
So how is explanation or explication in Spanish?
Explicacion.
Good.
And to explain
Explicar.
Good.
So I'm explaining it and you mean right now?
Estoy explicando.
Lo.
Stoy explicando lo lo estoy explicando.
The law can go on the end of a two form, but you can also go on the end of one of these and forms as well.
So you have the option lo estoy explicando, estoy explicando lo.
And you mean right now
Actually, in explicar, we get this plicar from plicare that we mentioned before, meaning to fold in Latin.
So explicar, to explain, to unfold.
You might want to say, uh, I'm taking a Spanish course.
Even if you're not in the course right now in this moment, when we are taking a course in our minds
there's a period of time in which we are taking a course and when we say it we're in that period of time.
If I say I'm taking a Spanish course, maybe I mean for three months and I'm in that period.
Do you remember what to take was?
We used it with uh to take a photo.
Tomar.
So tomar to take.
So I am taking.
Estoy tomando.
Good.
A coose.
I'm gonna let you guess it.
Una corsa?
Close is not with A, it's with O.
Uncle.
Uncurso with a U.
Uncurso.
Good.
of Spanish.
This is how you would say a Spanish course, a course of Spanish.
Very good.
Now, what if we put this toy in the past tense that we learned?
The past tense that is abba or ia.
I was taking a Spanish course
Estar estaba.
Estaba tomando un curso de español.
Which means we actually have two ways of saying I was taking.
We can say estaba tomando or we can just use tomar and use that that line in the past.
How would that sound?
Tomaba.
Yes.
So both tomaba and estaba tomando mean I was taking.
So you have the option.
Estaba tomando un curso de espagnol or tomaba un curso de espanol.
What was to eat?
Comer.
How would you say I was eating?
Comia.
Or how else could you say it?
Estaba comiendo.
So you have this option, comia or estaba comiendo.
Most of the time they're interchangeable.
Sometimes one might fit slightly better than the other and it's something you will pick up very naturally when you're practicing.
So if in one situation people tend to use a staba comiendo rather than comia, you will pick it up
So we have ando and yendo to form this ing and we saw in Spanish that we don't use it after prepositions
You don't use this ing either if you say something like swimming is healthy or running is healthy.
You don't use the ing there either.
You will just say to run is healthy.
To swim
is healthy.
If you hear people toast in Spanish you might hear them say salud, which means health.
Healthy is saludable.
To dance is healthy.
Bailar es saludable.
Good.
To swim is a nadar.
Nadar.
To swim is healthy.
Nadar es saludable.
So we're seeing that we don't use the ing in Spanish as much as we do in English.
Sometimes in English we make an adjective with ing.
We go from to interest
to interesting.
When we do this in English, this ing that we use in English to form an adjective, in Spanish it's ante for our verbs.
and i ente for er eer verbs.
So for example we had to interest.
What was to interest
Interesar.
Good.
So if you get rid of R and you put an you get that ing adjective.
Interesting.
So how would you say interesting?
Interesante.
Good.
So when you make an adjective with ing in English from the verb, you can just replace it with ante or ente.
How would you say to irritate in Spanish?
And you can go from irritation?
Irritacion?
Irritar.
So if you want to say irritating
Irritante Irritante It is irritating Es irritante Good Es irritante Good How would you say to frustrate in Spanish?
Frustration frustration frustar frustrar yes because you have the two R's now frustre frustre frustrar
Frustrating.
Frustrante.
Good.
To Wayne
to wane, to to reduce in size.
In Spanish it is menguar, menguar.
When the moon gets smaller, it's a waning
And the moon is La Luna.
La Luna.
So how would you say the waning moon
La luna menguante.
Good.
So there we're making waning like an adjective, not like the verb, not menguando.
Menguante.
La luna menguante.
Luna is an interesting word.
I don't know if you ever notice like in English Monday is moon day.
It's not very obvious in English that the days of the week
relate back to the planets but in Spanish it's very obvious you have La Luna the moon and then you have lunes Monday
Tuesday is Marte and Mars is Marte.
Planeta Marte.
Wednesday in Spanish is miércoles.
What planet does that sound like?
Mercury.
Yes.
Jueves in Spanish is spelt with a J.
Jupiter.
Viernes is Friday.
Venus.
So you can see much clearer there how our days of the week are named after planets.
To live was Bibir.
V-I-V-I-R.
So Bibir is to live.
Good.
We have two to bees.
We have a star for states and for characteristics we have
Ser.
And we said that unser means a being, that we can use ser like a noun and we get a being.
So a human being is
Un ser humano.
You could also say a living being.
A living being.
Un ser vivir.
How do you get this?
How do you get you could say un ser vivo?
Vivo is also like an adjective which means alive.
But living is adjective that we make with ing
We can build it from divir for r-verbs we have ante and for er-ear verbs we have yente
Un ser viviente.
Good.
A living being.
What was to go out or to leave?
Boy.
To go out or to leave.
So it's two.
I don't care if it's wrong, but I want it to end in R.
Ah, salir.
Salir.
Now we have in English you might have heard salient, which means kind of protruding or outstanding or something that stands out or sticks out or protrudes.
This is the Latin English version of this ante yente rule.
So we can see it even in English.
How would salient be in Spanish?
You can go from salient or you can go from salir.
Saliente good